What is crypto
Crypto-assets (crypto) describe an asset class that includes cryptocurrency, digital tokens and coins. It does not exist physically as coins or notes, but as digital tokens stored in a digital “wallet”. These digital tokens rely on cryptography and technology such as blockchain for security and other features. Crypto may or may not have an actual asset behind it.


Crypto is used for payment systems, to execute automated contracts, and run programs. Anyone can create a crypto-asset, so at any time there can be thousands in circulation.

Podcast: Crypto-assets for first time investors

Hear how crypto-assets work and what to think about before you invest.

Why crypto is so volatile
The price of crypto can fluctuate at extreme levels often based solely on market speculation. Factors that can influence the price of crypto include:

media focus
public announcements
individuals with large amounts of a crypto-asset who promote or influence it through social media
So if you buy crypto-assets, be prepared to lose everything that you put in. 

How crypto is used
Cryptocurrencies were first developed as a digital currency to use as money. Some stores accept crypto as payment for goods and services. Some ATMs let you withdraw it as physical money.

But crypto is not legal tender and is not widely accepted as payment. Most people don’t use it for everyday transactions. It is not the sort of investment to use to build your savings.

Once you invest there are no regulatory restrictions on how your funds are used. In some cases, your funds may be used for other investments, such as loans. This may jeopardise your investment.

Buying and storing crypto
You can buy or sell crypto on a trading platform using money. Or buy or sell it directly.
Crypto is kept in a unique digital or software wallet (hot) or hardware (cold) wallet. Each wallet has private keys (unique codes) that authorise transactions on the blockchain network.

A hardware wallet stores these private keys on a secure device not connected to the internet. This can protect the wallet from hackers.

A software wallet is held by an individual or by a crypto trading platorm on your behalf. This can simplify buying, selling and storing crypto, but is not a regulated service. So you may not be able to recover the crypto if the trading platform fails.

Types of crypto-assets
Each crypto-asset has different capabilities. Most were not created to be investments.

There are no universally defined categories of crypto-assets. Some common types are listed below, but this does not cover them all. New cryptos are created all the time, but many aren’t well structured and don’t last.

Cryptocurrencies
toggle accordian row
Stablecoins
toggle accordian row
Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs)
toggle accordian row
DeFi tokens
toggle accordian row
Other token types
toggle accordian row
Why investing in crypto is high-risk
Crypto is largely not regulated
Many crypto-assets and other digital assets are not commonly considered to be financial products. Because of this, the platform where you buy and sell crypto may not be regulated by ASIC. So you may not be protected if the platform fails or is hacked.

When a crypto-asset fails, you will most likely lose all the money you put in. In most countries, crypto is not legal tender. You're only protected to the extent that crypto fits within existing laws.

The value depends largely on popular opinion
Investing in crypto-assets is highly speculative. The market value can fluctuate a lot over short periods of time. It is affected by things like media hype and investor opinion.

The price of unbacked crypto may depend on:

its popularity at a given time (influenced by factors like the number of people using it)
how easy it is to trade or use
the perceived value of the currency
its underlying blockchain technology
Your money could be stolen
Be aware that a hacker can potentially steal the contents of your digital wallet.

Crypto systems allow users to stay relatively anonymous and there is no central data bank. So if a hacker steals your crypto, you have little hope of getting it back.

Using a wallet held offline, a ‘hardware wallet’ or ‘cold storage’, may offer more protection.
